Hello and welcome to this Python tutorial.
All right, so let's do our k-steps of the Random Walk
in Gibbs sampling, which I remind is an MCMC technique.
That is Markov Chain Monte Carlo technique.
And very soon we'll stake a step back
to explain what's going on with this random walk.
It's actually pretty fascinating,
and we will try to give a good representation
of what is going on.
All right, so we left off at what we have to add
inside this new for loop,
the third one of this training process
which is about the k-step contrasted divergence.
Okay, so basically, Gibbs sampling consists
of making this Gibbs chain.
There are simply several round trips from the visible nodes
to the hidden nodes,
and then from the hidden nodes to the visible nodes.
And in each round trip of this Gibbs chain of Gibbs sampling
well, the visible nodes are dated.
And step after step, we get closer
to our good predicted ratings.
So first we need to wonder what happens at the beginning.
What happens at the beginning is
that we start with our input batch of observations.
That is our input ratings that are all invisible,
that is, our batch of 100 users.
We get all the ratings from all these users
for all the movies.
Then in the first step of Gibbs sampling,
from this batch input vector of original ratings,
we are going to sample the first hidden nodes.
And we are going to sample these hidden nodes
with a Bernoulli sampling
following a PH given v0 distribution.
And that's exactly what happens in this sample_h function.
So basically, the first step
of k-steps contrasted divergence is to call sample_h
on the visible nodes,
because sample_h on the visible nodes will get
the first sampling of the first hidden nodes.
So that's what we have to do.
We have to call the sample_h function
to get the first sampled hidden nodes.
And since we actually want to get this second element
that sample_h function returns,
well, we're going to use the inverse trick as
what we did here.
We are going to start with an underscore
and then comma and then get hK
which are going to be the hidden nodes obtained
at the k-th step
of contrasted divergence.
Right now, we are at the first step.
So k equals 0.
But h0 is going to be the second element returned
by the sample_h method
and since the sample_h method is method in the rbm class,
well we need to call the sample_h function
from our rbm object.
And then, here we go, sample_h.
And since we are doing the sampling
of the first hidden nodes,
given the values of the first visible nodes,
that is our original ratings,
well the first input for our sample_h function
in this first step of Gibbs sampling is going to be visual.
But be careful, visual is the target,
which we don't wanna change.
So we have to take this vk here
because vk so far is our input batch
of observations, and then vk will be updated.
And you'll see that we'll update vk right after
we update hk with the other sampling function
which is sample_v.
So right now let's be careful.
We have to input vk and not v0.
So right now vk equals v0,
but then the next step is to update vk
so that vk is no longer v0,
but now vk is going to be,
according to you what is it going to be?
Well, it's going to be the sampled visible nodes
after the first step of Gibbs sampling.
And how do we get this sample?
Well of course is by calling the sample_v function
on the first sample of our hidden nodes that is hk,
the result of this first sampling
based on the first visible nodes,
the original visible nodes.
And so now vk is going to be rbm.sample
and now sample_v that we call on hk.
The hk that is here.
That is the first sampled hidden nodes.
All right.
So we get our first update of the visible nodes
that is the visible nodes after the first sampling.
That's the first step of our random walk,
that is the first step of Gibbs sampling.
And now what's wonderful is that we make this for loop.
So basically this will continue by itself,
because indeed then k will be equal to one
so we will enter the second step of Gibbs sampling
and so hk is going to be updated.
But since vk is now equal to the first sample
of visible nodes, well the sample_h(vk) will return
the second sample of hidden nodes.
And then this second sample of hidden nodes is going
to become the input of our sample_v function.
And that will return the new sample of the visible nodes,
that is the second sample of the visible nodes.
And again the ratings will be updated.
And then et cetera.
At the next step we get the third sample of hidden nodes
then the third sample of visible nodes
until the end of the loop we get the 10th sample
of hidden nodes and the 10th sample of visible nodes.
And now since we have our hk and vk after the last step
of the random walk,
well, we can now approximate the gradients
thanks to these lines: eight, nine, and 10.
That's all the purpose of doing what we just did.
You know?
What we just did here is the lines five and six.
We want to get the last sample
after the last step of the random walk,
the last sample of hidden nodes
and the last sample of visible nodes.
And that's because to update the weight
and the bias to approximate the gradient,
well you can see that here we need
the last sample of the visible nodes.
We don't directly use the last sample of the hidden nodes,
but that was just to get the last sample
of the visible nodes.
So that's great!
We just got our vk
and thanks to these vk,
we can now approximate the gradient
to update the weights and the bias.
And we have to right function for that.
It's the train function of our rbm class
and so it will be kids' stuff to update the weights.
All right, so let's go back to Python.
And back in Python, before we apply this train function
to update the weight,
well we need to do something very important.
It's related to the fact that we don't wanna learn
where there is no rating,
that is for the sales that have a minus one.
And to not include these sales
that contain the minus one ratings
in the training process,
well, we're going to freeze these visible nodes
that contain the minus one ratings.
That means that won't be possible to update them
during Gibbs sampling.
And so how can we do that?
How can we freeze these visible nodes
containing the minus one ratings?
Well, that's pretty easy.
We need to take our vk
because our vk is our visible nodes
that are being updated during the k steps
of the random walk.
So vk and then in brackets we're gonna get the nodes
that have a minus one rating,
that is that were not originally rated by the users.
And to do this, we need to get our target v0
because this wasn't changed.
This keeps the original ratings.
And we add lower than zero, to get the minus one ratings
because our ratings are either minus one, zero, or one.
And then for these visible nodes,
we're gonna say that they're equal to minus one.
Actually we're gonna say
that they keep the minus one ratings.
And so how can we make sure they keep them?
Well, it's by taking the original minus one ratings
from the target because it is not changed.
So, here we do the same.
We take some brackets and inside the brackets,
we take our v0 lower than zero.
Because that get all the minus one ratings.
All right!
So now by doing this,
we make sure that the training is not done on these ratings
that were not actually existent.
We only want to do the training on the ratings
that happened.
That actually makes sense.
All right!
So now we can get out of this third for loop
and soon enough we will start the training.
Okay, so this is now that we want to apply
the train function to update the weight and the bias.
But, you notice that in this train function,
well, we not only need our target, v0,
our sampled visible nodes
at the last step of the random walk, vk,
we also need ph0 that we have right here
so that's fine, but we also need phk.
And right now, we don't have any phk.
So what we have to do first
before applying the train function is to compute phk.
So let's do this!
It's going to be quite simple.
Actually try to compute it yourself before I do it.
So phk, then comma and underscore
because, well, you have guessed it,
we want to get the first element returned
by the sample_h function.
And so, you guessed it,
now we need to get the sample_h function applied.
Applied on what?
That is the question.
Applied on the last sample of the visible nodes.
You know at the end of the for loop.
So the last sample_visible nodes, at the 10th step
of the random walk, Gibbs sampling.
All right, so phk.
And then we take our rbm object, as usual,
and then from this rbm object we take our sample_h function.
And we apply the sample_h function to the last sample
of the visible nodes after the 10 steps and that is vk.
All right and now we get our phk
and therefore we get everything
we need to apply the train function.
So let's do this!
Let's apply the train function.
It's going to be kid stuff as I told you.
First, the train function doesn't return anything.
It just updates the weights according
to the lines eight, nine and ten
of this algorithm one k-step contrastive divergence.
So very simply, we don't create a new variable
because it doesn't return anything.
And we just take our rbm object
because this is a function from the rbm class.
And so from our rbm object, we call our train function,
train and now we are going to input
our four arguments that Python well recognized.
And so now we don't have to think or anything.
We can just input our four arguments
because everything is ready.
So here we go.
V0 then vk and ph0
and eventually phk that we just computed.
Perfect!
Now the training is going to happen.
The weight and the bias are going to be updated
towards the direction of maximum likelihood.
And therefore, all our probabilities will pv
given the states of the hidden nodes
will be more and more relevant,
will get the largest weights for the probabilities
that are the most significant
and eventually that will lead us to some predicted ratings
that are going to be close to the real ratings.
And speaking of being close to the real ratings,
that's exactly what we will measure
in the next line of code with the train loss.
So right now what we have to do is update the train loss
because we actually have our predictions
thanks to train function here that updates the weight.
Well, after all the observations of the batch go
into the network,
well, we're gonna compute all our hks and vks
and eventually get the last sample of the visible nodes
of the Gibbs chain but with the new weight
that were updated at the previous iteration.
And so, step-by-step we get our final vk
with better weights.
And at the last steps, the weights are going close
to the optimal weights
thanks to which we get the optimal sample_visible nodes
after the 10 steps of Gibbs sampling
which contain our best predicted ratings.
So now let's measure the loss
by updating the train loss variable.
And how are going to update this train loss?
Well, that's simple.
First, we are adding something to this train loss.
That's why I am using a plus equal.
And so now the question is what are we going to add
to this train loss.
Well, that's the error, that's the difference
between the predictive ratings and the real original ratings
of our target, v0.
So now what we have to do is compare vk
which is the last of the last visible nodes
after the last batch of users that went through the network.
So vk that we compared to v0,
the target that hasn't changed since the beginning.
And so as I told you in the previous tutorial,
well, we have two ways of measuring the error.
It's either with the RMAC tools
or the autoencoders.
Right now we'll gonna take the distance,
the simple distance in absolute values
between the prediction and the real rating.
And so what I am going to do now is user a torch function
that is actually the mean, very simply.
And inside this mean function I'm going to use
another torch function which is the abs function
that returns the absolute value of a number.
So abs of minus two returns two.
And so we're taking the absolute value
of the difference between the target and our prediction.
So the target is v0, that hasn't changed since the beginning
and the prediction is vk.
Our last of the last sample of visible nodes
after the last step of contrasted divergence
after the last batch of users went into the network.
All right so the absolute value of v0 minus vk,
but we can still improve this.
Remember in the training we didn't include the ratings
that were actually non-existent,
and therefore when we compute this difference
between the real original ratings and the predictions,
well, we have to take them for the ones that actually exist.
There is all the ratings that are larger than zero
and same for vk.
So I am just taking these because these guys
in the brackets correspond
to the indexes of the ratings that are existent.
So basically we need to just copy this to get in vk
the same indexes corresponding to the ratings
that are existent.
So that's just to be consistent
with what we did actually here,
to include only the existent ratings in the training.
All right!
So we're getting close to the end!
We have two more lines of code to go.
The first one is to update the counter
because the counter is just to normalize the train loss.
And so here we just need to increment it by one in float.
And then, the last line of code is
to print what is going to happen in the training.
You know, when we execute the code we would like
to see what happens.
And what we would like to see is the number of the epoch,
you know, to see in which epoch we are during the training.
And then for these epoch we want to see the loss,
how it's decreasing.
This will get us a great idea of how the training is doing.
All right so we're gonna use the print function
and this print function is included in the for loop,
looping through all the epochs
because we are going to print this at each epoch.
All right so in this print function,
we're gonna start with a string which is going to be epoch,
all right, then colon, and then a space
and I close the string.
Because after the string, I'm going to put the epoch
where we are at in the training.
And so I am adding a plus
because that's how we concatenate two strings.
You know we use a plus to separate two strings,
that is this first string epoch
and a second string
that I'm getting with the str function
because in this str function I'm inputting the epoch
we are at in the training.
So the epoch is an integer,
but inside this str function, it will become a string.
And that is just because we want to concatenate
two strings with each other.
So str epoch and then plus
and now I'm opening a new string.
And inside this new string,
well first I'm going to add a space to separate
the epoch value and what I'm about to add which is loss
then colon, then space again to separate the last string
to the last result.
And now I have to get out of the string that is just
for the last string that I just added.
And here again, plus because we're concatenating the strings
plus again str to only have strings.
And then str I'm putting the train loss,
but that I want to normalize.
And to normalize it, I have to divide it by s to counter.
All right, and that will print the epoch where we are at
in the training and the associated loss,
actually the normalized train loss.
Perfect!
So now I think the training is ready to be executed,
I hope we didn't make any mistake
in all these lines of code.
Well, let's check it out.
Well first we don't have any warnings,
that's a good sign.
So let's try it.
I'm going to select all these lines.
And let's execute.
All right, here we go, it seems to be okay.
The training is happening.
And we end up with a train loss of 0.25 which is pretty good
because that means that in the training set,
well we get the correct predictive rating,
three times out of four.
One time out of four we make a mistake
when predicting the ratings of the movies by all our users.
So that's pretty good,
but let's not scream victory yet.
We need to evaluate our model on new observations
and that is what the test set is for.
So in the next tutorial we will do the same on the test set,
we will make our predictions on the test set
without doing any training, of course.
And same, we will compute a test loss,
which will be the same loss, that absolute distance,
well actually the mean of the absolute distance is
between the predictions and the ratings.
And so what we're hoping for is to get a test loss
that is around this 0.25 value.
If it is around it, that means that even on new observations
well we predict correctly, three ratings out of four.
So that would be amazing.
So we will find out about that in the next tutorial
and until then enjoy deep learning!